Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from
the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
“No, impossible!” said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing
“Very lovely,” said Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pávlovna straight in the face with a
“That is doubtful,” said Prince Andrew. “Monsieur le Vicomte quite
“Bonaparte has said so,” remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic
it,’” Prince Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the
“One must admit,” continued Prince Andrew, “that Napoleon as a man
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders
husband. Prince Andrew’s eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
“Allow me, sir,” said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold,
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew’s study like
said Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white
face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract
diplomatist?” asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.
“That is all nonsense.” Prince Andrew again interrupted him, “let
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre’s childish words.
answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naïve question.
Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
dress as fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely
“With my father and sister, remember,” said Prince Andrew gently.
“Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier,” said Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
“Lise!” was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed
“Lise, I beg you to desist,” said Prince Andrew still more
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.
“Lise!” said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
“My wife,” continued Prince Andrew, “is an excellent woman, one
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkónski
marry!” concluded Prince Andrew.
friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the
Prince Andrew’s calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary
“My part is played out,” said Prince Andrew. “What’s the use of
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance—friendly and
“I don’t understand it,” replied Prince Andrew. “Women who are
reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew’s sister.
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go
promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but
porch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
sound of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who
cry or to laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as
kissing each other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew’s surprise
cry. Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and
rested on Prince Andrew’s face.
“She needs rest,” said Prince Andrew with a frown. “Don’t you,
lathe?” asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which
style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
thick, bushy eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on
pregnant,” said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his
Prince Andrew smiled.
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began—at first
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his
by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
ancestor of the Bolkónskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
“Everyone has his Achilles’ heel,” continued Prince Andrew.
of it. Prince Andrew” (he always spoke thus of his son) “has been
pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
Consider, Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvórov; Moreau!...
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering
her sister-in-law’s room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without
traveling effects of Prince Andrew’s were in very good order: new,
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew’s face
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we
makes things trying for you, doesn’t it?” Prince Andrew asked
very trying,” said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their
powder,” said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
“Even if it were a great deal of trouble...” answered Prince Andrew,
To please you...” said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing
asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
“Well, maybe!” said Prince Andrew. “Go, Másha; I’ll come
wing with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly
Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been called to his
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age
Prince Andrew, evidently confused. “I know that out of a million
“I don’t understand!” said Prince Andrew.
him. “Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,
“I also wanted to ask you,” continued Prince Andrew, “if I’m
at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white
Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.
angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study
to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the
“This is Dólokhov,” said Prince Andrew.
the advanced army. Prince Andrew Bolkónski came into the room with the
“Give me that letter,” said Kutúzov turning to Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he
From Vienna Kutúzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew’s father.
generally, Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two
Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.
“Probably,” said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.
Prince Andrew stopped short.
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his
“Why are you so glum?” asked Nesvítski noticing Prince Andrew’s
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvítski and Zherkóv, there came toward
Nesvítski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but
“What’s the matter?” exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian
build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than many
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what
answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved
Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and
The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went
with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a
Prince Andrew’s joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutúzov’s army
head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intelligent
at Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest
Prince Andrew stayed at Brünn with Bilíbin, a Russian acquaintance of
said Bilíbin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. “Franz, put the
After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat’s
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutúzov.
Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high
“But seriously,” said Prince Andrew, “we can at any rate say
methods that he had better leave Genoa alone?” retorted Prince Andrew
He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his
Prince Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle
Prince Andrew.
“What an extraordinary genius!” Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,
“But joking apart,” said Prince Andrew, “do you really think the
“Impossible!” cried Prince Andrew. “That would be too base.”
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a
face, and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom—he had to
to him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these
“Wait, I have not finished...” he said to Prince Andrew, seizing
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go,” replied Prince Andrew
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had
conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew and
Before returning to Bilíbin’s Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop
“Eh? What?” asked Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew could not understand.
“I did not... What is it all about?” inquired Prince Andrew
“Stop jesting,” said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news
“It may be treachery,” said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the
“Where are you off to?” he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
“Not at all,” said Prince Andrew.
“I cannot argue about it,” replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew
apron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up
piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron
Prince Andrew riding up to the officer.
“Let them pass, I tell you!” repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his
Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless,
Prince Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvítski and another adjutant
added, noticing that Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.
“It’s nothing,” replied Prince Andrew.
abominable, quite abominable!” said Prince Andrew, and he went off to
at Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.
horses near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.
Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutúzov but the expression of
“I have the honor to present myself,” repeated Prince Andrew rather
Prince Andrew glanced at Kutúzov’s face only a foot distant from him
on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew.
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
Between three and four o’clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who
as if to reassure Prince Andrew.
brave officer,” thought Bagratión. Prince Andrew, without replying,
French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.
said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer
from Prince Andrew to the staff officer.
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer’s small figure.
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.
bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at
seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
“Thank you very much, I will go on alone,” said Prince Andrew,
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.
could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the
commander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our front
grew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dólokhov. Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and most
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took
dip. Prince Andrew, being always near the commander in chief, closely
“No, friend,” said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a
“Why,” thought Prince Andrew, “that’s the captain who stood up
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,
The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back
“It has begun. Here it is!” thought Prince Andrew, feeling the
white horse, was Prince Bagratión. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for
Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
impassive face?” Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince
Bagratión bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew
had foreseen. Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke
of Túshin’s battery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite. Behind
a kind no longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of
at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield.
dull eyes looked at him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the
support of his battery all was forgotten. Prince Andrew listened
in accord with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that
often heard. “What is this?” thought Prince Andrew approaching the
Sixth Chasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by
a cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading him
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagratión,
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the space
artilleryman to Prince Andrew. “Not like your honor!”
Prince Andrew said nothing to Túshin. They were both so busy as to seem
(one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode
ring, and Zherkóv, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,
“I had not the pleasure of seeing you,” said Prince Andrew, coldly
intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Túshin from under his brows and his
“Your excellency!” Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt
and without awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He felt
ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkónski, through whom he hoped to
Andrew, whom Borís was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who
recounting his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure
In spite of Prince Andrew’s disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could
“As to your business,” Prince Andrew continued, addressing Borís,
And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostóv,
“Of whom you imagine me to be one?” said Prince Andrew, with a quiet
“And I will tell you this,” Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of
I shall expect you, Drubetskóy. Au revoir!” exclaimed Prince Andrew,
Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostóv think of what he ought to
He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmütz that day, but the appearance of
When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuously (with
“Very well, then, be so good as to wait,” said Prince Andrew to the
purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for
been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the general
Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand.
Borís smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to
“All right, all right. We’ll talk it over,” replied Prince Andrew.
While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general, that
waited impatiently for Prince Andrew’s return from the commander in
said Prince Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the
Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young
The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied
of the victory that had been gained. Prince Andrew introduced his
which were uppermost in his mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew
before Prince Andrew could finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summon
pressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Borís. “You know I should
at Prince Andrew with cool intensity, walking straight toward him and
evidently expecting him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew
Austerlitz, Borís was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgorúkov
Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the
“Yes, you have seen him?” said Prince Andrew. “Well, what is
“But tell me, what is he like, eh?” said Prince Andrew again.
situated,” said Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, which might
Weyrother’s had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began
at the map, but at Prince Andrew’s face.
“I will do so,” said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.
On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutúzov,
came with the news that the prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came
“How is that?...” began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waiting
midnight. Prince Andrew went out.
The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to
suffering?” suggested another voice. Prince Andrew, however, did not
“Well then,” Prince Andrew answered himself, “I don’t know
coachman’s, was teasing Kutúzov’s old cook whom Prince Andrew knew,
halted. Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense number forming the
Prince Andrew considered possible contingencies and formed new projects
could be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would
“My dear fellow,” Nesvítski whispered to Prince Andrew, “the old
upon Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutúzov’s
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.
Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.
name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back. Kutúzov
“All right, all right!” he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to a
started,” thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with
“Waiting, Your Majesty,” repeated Kutúzov. (Prince Andrew noted
speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind
With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, not more
thought Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutúzov.
Prince Andrew shouted, “Brothers! All’s lost!” And at this as if
from his cheek. Prince Andrew forced his way to him.
of fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutúzov, saw on the
But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears of
“Hurrah!” shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up
that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew’s hands, but he
was immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,
round. Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty paces
“What are they about?” thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them.
was about to be decided. But Prince Andrew did not see how it ended. It
at all as I ran,” thought Prince Andrew—“not as we ran, shouting
hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkónski bleeding profusely and unconsciously
on a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his back with
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the
Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before the Emperor’s
connected in his memory with Prince Andrew.
Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few
Napoleon’s eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but the
“It would be good,” thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his
And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care of
the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of the
he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and though he
princess. (In accordance with Lise’s and Prince Andrew’s wishes they
large leather sofa from Prince Andrew’s study into the bedroom. On
the face and figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of
downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince Andrew entered
of his appearance before her now. Prince Andrew went round the sofa and
Bogdánovna advised Prince Andrew to leave the room.
The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary,
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next
confused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face with his hands
through the door. Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and tried to
could not scream like that—came from the bedroom. Prince Andrew ran to
“What have they taken a baby in there for?” thought Prince Andrew in
of the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor gave him a
seeing Prince Andrew stopped, hesitating on the threshold. He went into
Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into his father’s
Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went
to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat in another room,
interpreted. The life of old Prince Bolkónski, Prince Andrew, and
about to smile, and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and
though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was that in the
Soon after Prince Andrew’s return the old prince made over to him a
partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with
Prince Andrew made use of Boguchárovo, began building and spent most of
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not
while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in the war and
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father’s
for Prince Andrew.
said one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a
table, a child’s table, and the little chair on which Prince Andrew
off—and this is what comes of it!” said Prince Andrew in an
Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed, wineglass
Prince Andrew went out.
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.
hoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out and sat
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. It was
Prince Andrew, recalling his father’s letter. “Yes, we have gained
At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while,
Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he had
forehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand; even
but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent. Prince Andrew
and dropped it again behind her. Prince Andrew recognized her without
“He has perspired,” said Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain her
world. Prince Andrew was the first to move away, ruffling his hair
face with Prince Andrew, who came out frowning and looking old. Pierre
“Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad,” said Prince Andrew.
and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner, paler, and more
animation of the past or the future. It was as if Prince Andrew would
“Plans!” repeated Prince Andrew ironically. “My plans?” he said,
Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew’s face,
“No, I meant to ask...” Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted
made. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre’s story of what he
“I’ll tell you what, my dear fellow,” said Prince Andrew, who
intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and interest only of
“I was very much surprised when I heard of it,” said Prince Andrew.
“Forever?” said Prince Andrew. “Nothing’s forever.”
“Why so?” asked Prince Andrew. “To kill a vicious dog is a very
“Why is it wrong?” urged Prince Andrew. “It is not given to man
pleasure that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was
something I cannot inflict on others,” said Prince Andrew, growing
saying.” Prince Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.
explained Prince Andrew. “The others, one’s neighbors, le prochain,
Prince Andrew. “I build a house and lay out a garden, and you build
“Come, let’s argue then,” said Prince Andrew, “You talk of
it you talked about?” and Prince Andrew crooked a third finger. “Ah,
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was
“Why not wash? That is not cleanly,” said Prince Andrew; “on the
“After Austerlitz!” said Prince Andrew gloomily. “No, thank you
hanged,” said Prince Andrew with a smile. “So I am serving because
“Yes, but it is not as you imagine,” Prince Andrew continued. “I
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated. His eyes glittered feverishly
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking
that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his
Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence now and
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, did not
Prince Andrew with one word, one argument, would upset all his teaching,
“Think? What about?” asked Prince Andrew with surprise.
Prince Andrew, looking straight in front of him, listened in silence to
peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew’s eyes and by his silence,
Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would
Prince Andrew, leaning his arms on the raft railing, gazed silently at
“A future life?” Prince Andrew repeated, but Pierre, giving him no
knew Prince Andrew’s former atheistic convictions.
“Yes, that is Herder’s theory,” said Prince Andrew, “but it is
make it right” (Prince Andrew’s voice trembled and he turned away),
Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage and horses had long since been
Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listening to
current beat softly against it below. Prince Andrew felt as if the sound
“Yes, if it only were so!” said Prince Andrew. “However, it is
Prince Andrew’s life. Though outwardly he continued to live in the
It was getting dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to the front
Prince Andrew with a smile drew Pierre’s attention to a commotion
“Those are Mary’s ‘God’s folk,’” said Prince Andrew. “They
Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meet them,
Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments, which were always kept
“Ah, and Ivánushka is here too!” said Prince Andrew, glancing with
sachiez que c’est une femme,” * said Prince Andrew to Pierre.
It was evident that Prince Andrew’s ironical tone toward the pilgrims
“Mais, ma bonne amie,” said Prince Andrew, “vous devriez au
“Where have you been? To Kiev?” Prince Andrew asked the old woman.
“What is it? Some new relics?” asked Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew, with a smile.
look of sincere penitence, and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at
Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously. Prince Andrew went out
the bells of the old prince’s carriage approaching. Prince Andrew and
Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back to his father’s study, found
on the shoulder, and then went up to the table where Prince Andrew,
strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charm was
Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.
out by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty.
Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his
“Boguchárovo Cloister,” as his father called Prince Andrew’s
books, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a critical survey of
“What is he talking about?” thought Prince Andrew. “Oh, the
As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several times to
Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the district
Prince Andrew went to visit him.
Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied with the business about which
Prince Andrew repeatedly glanced at Natásha, gay and laughing among the
full, in a pale, almost starless, spring sky. Prince Andrew leaned his
“Just once more,” said a girlish voice above him which Prince Andrew
Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sitting
“For her I might as well not exist!” thought Prince Andrew while he
waiting for the ladies to appear, Prince Andrew set off for home.
Prince Andrew. “But where is it?” he again wondered, gazing at
“Yes, it is the same oak,” thought Prince Andrew, and all at once he
“No, life is not over at thirty-one!” Prince Andrew suddenly decided
On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn
merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossing his
“If it were hot,” Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly
Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August, 1809. It was the time
Arakchéev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as a
It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic
antipathies,” thought Prince Andrew, “so it will not do to present
days later Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the
On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakchéev’s waiting
During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen the
down, others whispered and laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname
faces—that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the
an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened air
After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on
Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man of
“I am not petitioning, your excellency,” returned Prince Andrew
without looking at Prince Andrew—relapsing gradually into a tone of
presented,” said Prince Andrew politely.
Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew smiled.
to Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he
reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea, and Speránski
Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the
The day after his interview with Count Arakchéev, Prince Andrew spent
with the same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of
Count Kochubéy did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by the arm,
Speránski. Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a throb
the society in which Prince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who
whiteness and softness Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of
Prince Andrew followed Speránski’s every word and movement with
had kept him, and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty.
When Kochubéy introduced Prince Andrew, Speránski slowly turned
Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movement
white hands—the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the
and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of the
and Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of the people with whom
he had just been talking. This flattered Prince Andrew. “I have known
“No,” said Prince Andrew, “my father did not wish me to take
returned Prince Andrew, trying to resist Speránski’s influence, of
“And of state interest to some extent,” said Prince Andrew.
“I am an admirer of Montesquieu,” replied Prince Andrew, “and
improved by the change. Probably Prince Andrew’s thought interested
have attained the same end,” returned Prince Andrew. “Every courtier
During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt the
produced a strong impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, when he
before Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which
for the welfare of Russia. In Prince Andrew’s eyes Speránski was the
Prince Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of
irritated Prince Andrew, he knew not why. He was unpleasantly
analogy, and passed too boldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one
to him which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that it is
attracted Prince Andrew.
humble origin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish his
Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence was
A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army
said Natásha, pointing out Prince Andrew. “You remember, he stayed a
with no one interested in them and not wanted by anyone. Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearing
held next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected with Speránski
Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor’s
remembers me,” said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow quite
she raised her hand to Prince Andrew’s shoulder. They were the second
couple to enter the circle. Prince Andrew was one of the best dancers of
Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly as
After Prince Andrew, Borís came up to ask Natásha for a dance, and
merry cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was again her partner. He
ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard.
Like all men who have grown up in society, Prince Andrew liked meeting
put her hand gaily on the man’s shoulder, smiling at Prince Andrew.
my wife,” said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as
“What rubbish sometimes enters one’s head!” thought Prince Andrew,
the dancers. He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them, and asked
Next day Prince Andrew thought of the ball, but his mind did not dwell
Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council of
monastery), Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found the friendly
the anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato
like Speránski—was distinctly ejaculating ha-ha-ha. Prince Andrew
what Magnítski was going to say. When Prince Andrew entered the room
Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speránski with astonishment,
note. Prince Andrew did not laugh and feared that he would be a damper
too, seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew.
affairs, which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to
his study. “A wonderful talent!” he said to Prince Andrew, and
the verses were finished Prince Andrew went up to Speránski and took
They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into those mirrorlike,
When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in
Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before,
house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than in
that Prince Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner. “Yes,”
In Natásha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completely
After dinner Natásha, at Prince Andrew’s request, went to the
clavichord and began singing. Prince Andrew stood by a window talking
Prince Andrew left the Rostóvs’ late in the evening. He went to bed
Prince Andrew was standing before her, saying something to her with a
Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new and
something to Prince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and, asking
noticed Prince Andrew’s attentions to Natásha, decided that at a
absolutely necessary and, seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was alone,
sister. With so intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to
by her self-satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed, a
“I know your sister too little,” replied Prince Andrew, with a
the subject of Natalie caused Prince Andrew to knit his brows with
Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent.
“Oh, there was childish love?” suddenly asked Prince Andrew,
“Oh, undoubtedly!” said Prince Andrew, and with sudden and unnatural
“I must... I must have a talk with you,” said Prince Andrew. “You
Prince Andrew asked her something and how she flushed as she replied.
Next day, having been invited by the count, Prince Andrew dined with the
Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came, and
at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natásha and timidly started some
she remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by
In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up to
It seemed to Natásha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew
said her mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince Andrew
At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and telling him
and about Natásha and Prince Andrew; and again everything seemed to him
with tobacco smoke, when someone came in. It was Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic expression of renewed life on
the sofa beside Prince Andrew.
“Don’t talk rubbish...” said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking
“But do listen,” returned Prince Andrew, holding him by the
Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite
such love,” said Prince Andrew. “It is not at all the same feeling
and sad expression in his eyes. The brighter Prince Andrew’s lot
Prince Andrew needed his father’s consent to his marriage, and to
birth, wealth, or rank. Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as young
Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that his feelings, or
Prince Andrew returned to Petersburg.
Pierre did not come either and Natásha, not knowing that Prince Andrew
Before the countess could answer, Prince Andrew entered the room with
but Prince Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question,
straight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes.
Natásha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and at
Prince Andrew.
me?” said Prince Andrew.
year. And I wished to tell you of that,” said Prince Andrew.
“It is unavoidable,” said Prince Andrew with a sigh.
everything in the world.” Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast
Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into her eyes, and did not find
Prince Andrew, still looking into her eyes.
Prince Andrew, “it will give you time to be sure of yourself. I ask
you come to love...” said Prince Andrew with an unnatural smile.
Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay.
“And can’t it be helped?” she asked. Prince Andrew did not reply,
From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostóvs’ as
Bolkónski was not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He said
to hear of this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came every day to the
Prince Andrew; he seemed a man from another world, and for a long time
omens there had been of it: Prince Andrew’s coming to Otrádnoe and
spoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to
Sometimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and ask
leaving them alone, even when they did not wish it. When Prince Andrew
then she particularly loved to hear and see how Prince Andrew laughed.
On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought with
thereby inviting Prince Andrew to come too. He did so.
“Whatever trouble may come,” Prince Andrew continued, “I beg
Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sónya, nor Prince Andrew
Nicholas—“into an old maid like yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew
During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay,
Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Princess Mary wrote to her friend
from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and
Frenchwoman. She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his
obtain that impossible, visionary, sinful happiness. Prince Andrew had
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to
not seen her with Prince Andrew. It always seemed to him that there was
Prince Andrew at the same time as of the rest, and of how he would
come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would have
opera she had heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew. What she drew from
at the tea table. The servants stood round the table—but Prince Andrew
tales she had heard) to see a coffin, or him, Prince Andrew, in that
yet knowing whom Natásha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew.
replied that he was of age, that Prince Andrew was marrying without his
trousseau had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Prince Andrew
After Prince Andrew’s engagement to Natásha, Pierre without any
The time for Prince Andrew’s return and marriage was approaching, but
except the one he knew of—that Prince Andrew’s marriage threatened
impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected in
marrying. The old fellow’s crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not
of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs
that no one could understand it. She loved and knew Prince Andrew, he
hour with her without once mentioning Prince Andrew. “I couldn’t
to Prince Andrew, and knew that the Rostóvs had lived in the country
Bolkónski, Prince Andrew Bolkónski,” she went on with special
what had happened to her, and suddenly remembering Prince Andrew she
Prince Andrew had perished. And again in imagination she went over her
She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a
had not already broken faith with Prince Andrew, and again she found
by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew.
She loved Prince Andrew—she remembered distinctly how deeply she loved
that went before?” She recalled her love for Prince Andrew in all its
vividly pictured herself as Prince Andrew’s wife, and the scenes of
she thought, “to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide
spoiled. But am I really to abandon forever the joy of Prince Andrew’s
left off loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kurágin go to
“Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?” said Sónya.
magnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her her
what is there to oblige him to reply? Write to Pierre, as Prince Andrew
as he dressed to go to Márya Dmítrievna’s. “If only Prince Andrew would
Márya Dmítrievna informed him that Natásha had refused Prince Andrew
him, scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Prince Andrew’s
enough to be tied to a bad woman. But still he pitied Prince Andrew to
He was awaiting Prince Andrew’s return with dread and went every day to
As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his
Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next
morning. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state
sighed, looking toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was,
a month ago,” Prince Andrew was saying, “and by those who were unable to
tutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about
When Prince Meshchérski had left, Prince Andrew took Pierre’s arm and
Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natásha, and his
“Both true and untrue,” Pierre began; but Prince Andrew interrupted him.
“Then she is here still?” said Prince Andrew. “And Prince Kurágin?” he
“I much regret her illness,” said Prince Andrew; and he smiled like his
said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.
Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father.
“Well, it doesn’t matter,” said Prince Andrew. “Tell Countess Rostóva
Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if trying to remember whether
“Yes,” returned Prince Andrew hastily. “I said that a fallen woman
Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: “Yes, ask her hand
the name of her who could give up Prince Andrew for anyone else.
evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with his father,
interested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news. Ten minutes
After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went to
city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on
Petersburg Prince Andrew met Kutúzov, his former commander who was
been appointed commander in chief. So Prince Andrew, having received an
Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge Kurágin.
failed to meet Kurágin in Turkey, for soon after Prince Andrew arrived,
Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had broken
Kurágin in Turkey, Prince Andrew did not think it necessary to rush back
days and nights with a Wallachian woman—Prince Andrew asked Kutúzov
Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way,
more self-confident, Prince Andrew thought. Dessalles, the tutor he had
changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last. The household was
were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whose
when Prince Andrew went to him and, trying to rouse him, began to
her and that she deserved it. “Why does Prince Andrew, who sees this,
“If you ask me,” said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he was
you ask me,” continued Prince Andrew, becoming irritable—as he was
disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could
“Father, I did not want to judge,” said Prince Andrew, in a hard and
low voice and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, with some embarrassment,
Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princess Mary persuaded him
before leaving, Prince Andrew went to his son’s rooms. The boy,
and Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard, but fell
Prince Andrew, without replying, put him down from his knee and went out
As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, and
“Thank God that I can,” replied Prince Andrew. “I am very sorry you
began to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room.
him, but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back again
“Then it must be so!” thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the
Prince Andrew’s mind.
Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of
Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to whom he had been assigned, on
Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army, was not there. He had
gone to Petersburg, but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this. His mind
days, while no duties were required of him, Prince Andrew rode round the
To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing his
and proud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined
From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached
Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa,
personally, to question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was to
Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen’s quarters—a country gentleman’s
Andrew had heard, was the mainspring of the whole affair. Prince Andrew
theorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was more
typical than any of them. Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German
“something absurd will come of it.”... Prince Andrew did not catch
Pfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the
Prince Andrew as past him—and said, with a laugh: “That must have been a
Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, was able to
He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernýshev about the present
Prince Andrew’s eyes were still following Pfuel out of the room when
Chernýshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where the Emperor,
Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew, taking advantage of the Emperor’s permission, accompanied
Russian. Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.
Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,
respect, Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew. From the tone in which
conclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listening to this
So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and he roused
At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he would
like to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circles
breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which they explained by
remembered Prince Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive her
she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole,
of Prince Andrew Bolkónski, appointed to the command of a regiment of
lied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made
On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his
first letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew had
Frenchwoman at a distance. Prince Andrew’s second letter, written near
as to the further progress of the war. In this letter Prince Andrew
“There was a letter from Prince Andrew today,” he said to Princess
“That must be very interesting,” said Dessalles. “Prince Andrew is in a
Mary for Prince Andrew’s letter which had been forgotten in the drawing
know, Prince Andrew’s letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles said
though from Prince Andrew’s letter it was evident that to remain at Bald
Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was looking
“Why are you here?” Prince Andrew repeated.
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee
in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew. “Houses are set on fire in your
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to
“Prince,” said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, “I only spoke because
“Well then,” continued Prince Andrew to Alpátych, “report to them as I
On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of that
Prince Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolénsk on the sixth
But despite this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrew had something to
beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that
horses and calves were straying in the English park. Prince Andrew rode
the fruit. An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sitting on
Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old garden had
one window which was open. A little serf boy, seeing Prince Andrew, ran
hearing that Prince Andrew had come, he went out with his spectacles on
began weeping and kissing Prince Andrew’s knee.
Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:
“What am I to say to him?” thought Prince Andrew, looking down on the
“Yes, let them have it,” replied Prince Andrew.
occupies the place?” asked Prince Andrew.
Alpátych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly
“Well, good-by!” said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpátych. “You
Alpátych clung to Prince Andrew’s leg and burst into sobs. Gently
the trees there, came upon Prince Andrew. On seeing the young master,
Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let them
Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise. He
Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dusty
crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of the
One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrew
“It’s dirty,” replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew
house Prince Andrew had built at Boguchárovo, ever in the same state,
or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and
far as the pond, along the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew had
Until Prince Andrew settled in Boguchárovo its owners had always been
Prince Andrew’s last stay at Boguchárovo, when he introduced hospitals
excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the people
a pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew’s
“If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That
Prince Andrew’s study and amuse himself by looking through and reading
father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughts
have done she felt bound to say and do. She went into Prince Andrew’s
“Eh, books, books!” said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew’s
On receiving command of the armies Kutúzov remembered Prince Andrew and
Prince Andrew arrived at Tsárevo-Zaymíshche on the very day and at the
from Prince Andrew, availing themselves of Kutúzov’s absence and of the
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness’ staff
“I had the pleasure,” replied Prince Andrew, “not only of taking part in
pressing Prince Andrew’s hand and looking into his face with a
pressed Prince Andrew’s hand.
Prince Andrew knew Denísov from what Natásha had told him of her first
plan to Prince Andrew.
General,” he added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutúzov had grown still more
at Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, moved with his
again glanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old men, it was
only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew’s
“I received news of his death, yesterday,” replied Prince Andrew
He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for some
time did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew saw that
While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman’s
Kutúzov’s adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of
The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with
him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kutúzov.
Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw by the
Prince Andrew told Kutúzov all he knew of his father’s death, and what
staff,” replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutúzov noticed.
“But above all,” added Prince Andrew, “I have grown used to my regiment,
pleasure suffused Prince Andrew’s face at this recollection.
be kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man’s eyes.
Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutúzov’s tears came easily, and that he
“But shan’t we have to accept battle?” remarked Prince Andrew.
“I’ll tell you what to do,” he continued, as Prince Andrew still did not
Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that
anything,” thought Prince Andrew, “but he will hear everything, remember
“Prince Andrew’s? We shall pass it and I’ll take you to him.”
On that bright evening of August 25, Prince Andrew lay leaning on his
him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as
Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had come
Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had tripped
unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general,
the shed full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew’s face he felt
stop it?” said Prince Andrew sarcastically. “Well, and how’s Moscow? And
The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparently
“So you understand the whole position of our troops?” Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew.
“Ask them,” replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.
such a question. Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew.
enemy,” said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. “It is very sound:
this,” cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape him
Prince Andrew ironically.
“But that’s impossible,” said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter
“Yes,” replied Prince Andrew, “but with this little difference, that
Prince Andrew glanced at Timókhin, who looked at his commander in alarm
Prince Andrew now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain from
“At such a moment!” Prince Andrew repeated. “To them it is only a moment
All were silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of the shed
Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation
from the shed, and looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognized
continuing to converse, and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these
“Extend widely!” said Prince Andrew with an angry snort, when they had
“Yes, yes,” answered Prince Andrew absently. “One thing I would do if
“Yes, yes,” muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew.
“Not take prisoners,” Prince Andrew continued: “That by itself would
Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all the same to him whether or
them?” exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill, piercing voice. “Ah, my
Górki!” said Prince Andrew suddenly.
“Oh no!” Pierre replied, looking at Prince Andrew with frightened,
expression of Prince Andrew’s face was angry or tender.
On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but he could
describe it,” she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrew smiled
Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again began
On returning to Górki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered
after his talk with Prince Andrew.
Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew’s regiment was among the reserves which till after one
Prince Andrew, pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment, paced up
rear they returned immediately and hastily. At first Prince Andrew,
The adjutant, having obeyed this instruction, approached Prince Andrew.
with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the
Prince Andrew hesitated. The smoking shell spun like a top between him
“Can this be death?” thought Prince Andrew, looking with a quite new,
a suffocating smell of powder, and Prince Andrew started to one side,
officers. Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass,
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressing station by the
delirious. Prince Andrew’s bearers, stepping over the wounded who had
one of the tents and there stopped, awaiting instructions. Prince Andrew
Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him with
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been
cleared and which a dresser was washing down. Prince Andrew could not
on the third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while he was left
familiar to Prince Andrew. Several dressers were pressing on his chest
spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wiping his hands.
He glanced at Prince Andrew’s face and quickly turned away.
someone, and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to
After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andrew enjoyed a
head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting him up and
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep. Whether because he
The doctor who had been standing beside him, preventing Prince Andrew
“My God! What is this? Why is he here?” said Prince Andrew to himself.
thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him.
Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving
that of Prince Andrew.
“They, the soldiers at the battery, Prince Andrew killed... that old
This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolkónski.
The calèche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted Sónya’s
“Mamma,” said Sónya, “Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded. He is
the raised hood of Prince Andrew’s calèche. She did not know who was
it necessary to tell Natásha of Prince Andrew’s wound and of his being
When Natásha had been told that morning that Prince Andrew was seriously
it was not Prince Andrew who was moaning. She knew Prince Andrew was in
the door into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew lay. It was dark
From the moment she had been told that morning of Prince Andrew’s wound
Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt, and such as she
Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in the
the doctor. He felt Prince Andrew’s pulse, and to his surprise and
Prince Andrew’s regiment, had joined him in Moscow and was being
Borodinó. They were accompanied by a doctor, Prince Andrew’s valet, his
They gave Prince Andrew some tea. He drank it eagerly, looking with
Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something.
was feeling. Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but
The first time Prince Andrew understood where he was and what was the
then return again to his own thoughts. But Prince Andrew’s mind was not
And suddenly the sequence of these thoughts broke off, and Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew to himself. While listening to this whispering and feeling
That’s enough, please leave off!” Prince Andrew painfully entreated
“Oh, how oppressive this continual delirium is,” thought Prince Andrew,
before him with the force of reality and drew nearer. Prince Andrew
out, and the strange face was before him. Prince Andrew collected all
Prince Andrew sighed with relief, smiled, and held out his hand.
“I love you,” said Prince Andrew.
“I love you more, better than before,” said Prince Andrew, lifting her
its swollen lips, was more than plain—it was dreadful. But Prince Andrew
Dreadful as the countess imagined it would be should Prince Andrew die
would be renewed, no one—least of all Natásha and Prince Andrew—spoke of
knew of Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, the
found her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrew
there are children, turned to Prince Andrew’s little son, caressing him
set off in search of Prince Andrew.
is that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikoláevich, were not living, it
like Prince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy
mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them;
from them in practical activity. But when she heard of Prince Andrew’s
loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him. She
of which was occupied by Prince Andrew. The wounded man was much better
Sónya was there too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and
friends went together to Prince Andrew’s door. Natásha opened it
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows. His pale face was
that Sónya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen
A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natásha went to him, but
Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marrying Princess Mary, she
to set off. That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself, Princess
Prince Andrew’s relations with Natásha might, if he recovered, be
Rostóvs were staying in Yaroslávl, and in what condition Prince Andrew
As soon as Natásha, sitting at the head of Prince Andrew’s bed, heard
herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew.
When Natásha opened Prince Andrew’s door with a familiar movement and
thing. He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he say that,
Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary, and only
“And so you have met Count Nicholas, Mary?” Prince Andrew suddenly said,
Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, but
When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew’s room he looked at
was crying. Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to
Prince Andrew’s little son was seven. He could scarcely read, and knew
When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what
Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had
death, and Prince Andrew died.
But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep,
From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together with
He now often remembered his conversation with Prince Andrew and quite
agreed with him, though he understood Prince Andrew’s thoughts somewhat
differently. Prince Andrew had thought and said that happiness could
After Prince Andrew’s death Natásha and Princess Mary alike felt this.
Prince Andrew’s last days had bound Princess Mary and Natásha together;
day he had learned that Prince Andrew, after surviving the battle of
told after his rescue, about the death of Prince Andrew, the death of
Prince Andrew had often occupied Pierre’s thoughts and now recurred to
On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew, of their
the condition in which she had found Prince Andrew. But Pierre’s face
tears. As he listened he did not think of Prince Andrew, nor of death,
that by not speaking of him” (she meant Prince Andrew) “for fear of not
“I understand why he” (Prince Andrew) “liked no one so much as him,”
He was thinking of Prince Andrew, of Natásha, and of their love, at one
from it, the death of Prince Andrew, Natásha’s despair, Pétya’s death,
Prince Andrew (she never mentioned him to her husband, who she imagined
was jealous of Prince Andrew’s memory), or on the rare occasions when
father—Prince Andrew—and his father had neither shape nor form, but he

